---
title: "Developing More Accurate Models of Tornados Through Computational Analysis of The Tornado Wind Fields Produced by Simulated Supercell Events"
collection: talks
type: "Conference Proceedings Talk"
permalink: /talks/2019-CSME
venue: "CSME-CFDSC Congress 2019"
date: 2019-06-03
location: "London, Canada"
---

This talk was a prentation of the work I had performed under the supervision of Dr. Eric Savory of the University of Western Ontario's Mechanical & Materials Engineering department and Dr. Leigh Orf of the University of Wisoncsin--Madison's Space Science and Engineering Center. The abstract summarizing the details of my talk are given below.

Abstract
=======
Tornados are a major hazard and can form at any time; to understand them and the dangers that they pose is an important matter. Currently, the Rankine vortex model is used as the basis for theoretical tornado analysis and various small-scale wind facilities are used for experimental analyses[^1]<sup>,</sup>[^2], but these both assume axial symmetry, impose symmetric boundary conditions on the entire domain, and do not incorporate the changes in intensity of wind and shape of the vortex that occur in an actual tornado. To more accurately model tornados, simulated supercells created on the Blue Waters supercomputer in the USA at large scales were analysed. After the extraction of the wind fields at all time steps, the data were circumferentially averaged and statistically analysed with computational methods for peak tangential wind speeds, anomalies in the vortex characteristics, and movement of the tornado centre. These methods provide more accurate models of tornados, which may be used to predict the formation of tornados, how much damage that can occur for a given tornado size, and over what area is the tornado considered dangerous. Thus far, the analysis has demonstrated that the simulated tornadoes have dangerous velocities of well over 50 percent the peak velocity far from the core of the tornado and so the velocity curves look quite different to previous models’ curves. These preliminary findings indicate that there is need to investigate the tornado dynamics at more than just the radius of maximum tangential velocity and to pay closer attention to the shape of the vortex instead of simply assuming axial symmetry.

[^1]: H. L. Kuo, "Axisymmetric Flows in the Boundary Layer of a Maintained Vortex," Journal of Atmospheric Sciences, vol. 28, pp. 20-41, 1970.
[^2]: M. Refan and H. Hangan, "Characterization of Tornado-Like Flow Fields in a New Model Scale Wind Testing Chamber," Journal of Wind Engineering and Industrial Aerodynamics, vol. 151, pp. 107-121, 2015.